Define OPTIMADE regex format (#490)
Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE: optimade.rst

    [3,7,19, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]]
    [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]

OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format
----------------------------------
This section defines a string representation for regular expressions (regexes) to be referred to from other parts of the specification.
This format will be referred to as an "OPTIMADE regex."

> Depending on the context, a delimiter may be required to enclose the regex (e.g., double quotes or a slash character), and some outer-level escape rule may apply (e.g., to distinguish an enclosing double quote from one that is part of the regex).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the context, a delimiter may be required to enclose the regex (e.g., double quotes or a slash character), and some outer-level escape rules may apply (e.g., to distinguish an enclosing double quote from one that is part of the regex).
```

> Such delimiters and escape rules are not defined as part of the OPTIMADE regex format itself and has to be clarified when this format is referenced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such delimiters and escape rules are not defined as part of the OPTIMADE regex format itself and have to be clarified when this format is referenced.
```

The format is a subset of the format described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

> The format is closely inspired by the subset recommended in the JSON schema standard, see `JSON Schema: A Media Type for Describing JSON Documents 2020-12, section 6.4 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#section-6.4>`__.

Author: ```suggestion
The format is closely inspired by the subset recommended in the JSON Schema standard, see `JSON Schema: A Media Type for Describing JSON Documents 2020-12, section 6.4 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#section-6.4>`__.
```

> However, OPTIMADE has decided to restrict the subset further to better align with the features available in common database backends and clarified that the escape character token can be used with the meaning defined by ECMA-262, section 21.2.1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, OPTIMADE has decided to restrict the subset further to better align it with the features available in common database backends and clarified that the escape character token can be used with the meaning defined by ECMA-262, section 21.2.1.
```

> Hence, an OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__ (when processed with Unicode support) that only uses the following tokens and features (this list is partially quoted from the JSON Schema standard):

Author: ```suggestion
Hence, an OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.
The regex is interpreted according to the processing rules that apply for an expression where only the Unicode variable is set to true of all variables set by the RegExp internal slot described by [Sec. 21.2.2.1](https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-notation).
Furthermore, it can only use the following tokens and features (this list is partially quoted from the JSON Schema standard):
```

- Individual Unicode characters, as defined by the `JSON specification <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#RFC8259>`__.

> - The escape character (``\``) with the functionality described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

Author: I agree that the ECMA standards document isn't great. 

Yet, if we want this regex appendix to also describe the 'pattern' field inherited into OPTIMADE from JSON Schema, then, as I see it, we must use ECMA-262 as the defining source to make it clear that our definition adheres to the JSON Schema standard by being a subset of what is allowed by that standard.

That said, we can copy, e.g., table 34 from the ECMA standard to help clarify what that means.

If we can help it, I really would want to avoid the OPTIMADE standard encompassing two different subsets of PCRE2.

> - The escape character (``\``) with the functionality described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

Author: Now that we dive into the ECMA standard - my appendix text has tried to stay as close as possible to [the JSON Schema standard sec 6.4](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#section-6.4), which specifies that the expressions should be evaluated assuming the ['u' flag of the ECMA standard](https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-notation). However, I see that this does not sufficiently define the other possible flags in that section:
 
* s = dot matches newline
* i = case insensitive matching
* m = anchors matches newlines

We probably should clarify that the regex format we define are for all of these off (?), or more succinctly that all variables that can be set by the RegExp internal slot according to 21.2.2.1 should be false, except for Unicode.

> - The escape character (``\``) with the functionality described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

Author: Pinging @sauliusg for another look here: if you agree with my argument that we need to use ECMA as the defining source (but we can further clarify what that means if we want), and if you are otherwise happy with this PR, can you please approve it as it is, and we can jointly work out and amend this appendix with clarifications at a future point? As far as I know, the property definitions PR currently is stalled *only*  on the need to refer to a regex format for the 'pattern' string validation, which this PR is meant to fix.

> - The escape character (``\``) with the functionality described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

Reviewer 2: When I looked it up I actually meant table 34. Now I read that "Depending on the context, a delimiter may be required to enclose the regex (e.g., double quotes ...", so escaping a double quote will be necessary and it is not in the table 54 (at least not explicitly), but it is in the table 34.

But honestly, I can not follow the ECMA definition of REs to see what the consequences of those definitions in two different places are, not at all if I just look at their web site... And this is after 20+ years working with REs... :/ I can not see how ECMA can be useful or relevant for anything.

There is a POSIX RE standard. There are of course also PCREs, but since we take a subset of those this will be a common subset. So why not settling on:

ISO/IEC 9945-2:1993 Information technology – Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) – Part 2: Shell and Utilities, successively revised as ISO/IEC 9945-2:2002 Information technology – Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) – Part 2: System Interfaces, ISO/IEC 9945-2:2003, and currently ISO/IEC/IEEE 9945:2009 Information technology – Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) Base Specifications, Issue 7

or something like that...

> - The escape character (``\``) with the functionality described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

Reviewer 2: Are we going to support escapes like '\cJ' (meaning '\n')?

> - The escape character (``\``) with the functionality described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

Author: *For the subset we are trying to define here*, do you know if there are any differences between the POSIX RE standard you suggest and PCRE? If there is, that would be a problem, since many of us want to use PCRE engines to handle OPTIMADE RE:s without having to translate them.

Anyway, from what you suggest, I guess these are our main options:

1. Accept using a subset of the ECMA-262 standard - which - while poorly written - is widely adopted by the world as a standard underpinning (dialects of) javascript.

2. Define a RE subset that *in practice* is compatible with the ECMA-262 standard and PCRE, but not explicitly so. I suppose this does work in practice, just that it will generate doubt among our users whether the definition of `pattern` in our property definitions is compatible with the JSON schema definition of `pattern` or not.

3. Define a RE subset that isn't compatible with the ECMA-262 standard. We then, on this singular point, break the connection between our property definitions and JSON Schema.

> - The escape character (``\``) with the functionality described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/>`__.

Reviewer 2: > _For the subset we are trying to define here_, do you know if there are any differences between the POSIX RE standard you suggest and PCRE? If there is, that would be a problem, since many of us want to use PCRE engines to handle OPTIMADE RE:s without having to translate them.
> 
> Anyway, from what you suggest, I guess these are our main options:
> 
>     1. Accept using a subset of the ECMA-262 standard - which - while poorly written - is widely adopted by the world as a standard underpinning (dialects of) javascript.
> 
>     2. Define a RE subset that _in practice_ is compatible with the ECMA-262 standard and PCRE, but not explicitly so. I suppose this does work in practice, just that it will generate doubt among our users whether the definition of `pattern` in our property definitions is compatible with the JSON schema definition of `pattern` or not.
> 
>     3. Define a RE subset that isn't compatible with the ECMA-262 standard. We then, on this singular point, break the connection between our property definitions and JSON Schema.
> 
> 
> > Are we going to support escapes like '\cJ' (meaning '\n')?
> 
> I don't see that listed explicitly in the subset, so my take would be no. We can clarify that if you want.

I think it is important that we clarify it, otherwise we risk different understanding of the OPTIMADE standard. My understanding after plowing through the ECMA was that we *do* mandate these escapes (actually, all escapes...) at the moment.

- Simple character classes (e.g., ``[abc]``) and range character classes (e.g., ``[a-z]``).
- Complemented character classes (e.g., ``[^abc]``, ``[^a-z]``)
- Simple quantifiers: ``+`` (one or more), ``*`` (zero or more), ``?`` (zero or one).
- The beginning-of-input (``^``) and end-of-input (``$``) anchors.
- Simple grouping (``(...)``) and alternation (``|``).

Note that compared to the JSON Schema standard, lazy quantifiers (``+?``, ``*?``, ``??``) are NOT included, nor are range quantifiers (``{x}``, ``{x,y}``, ``{x,}``).

> Unless explicitly anchored, the expression is evaluated unanchored.

Author: Please check the updated PR.

> Unless explicitly anchored, the expression is evaluated unanchored.
> For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".

Author: ```suggestion
The expression matches the string at any position unless it contains a leading beginning-of-input (``^``) or trailing end-of-input (``$``) anchor listed above, i.e., the anchors are not implicitly assumed.
For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".
```

    [3,7,19, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]]
    [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]

OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format
----------------------------------
This section defines a string representation for regular expressions (regexes) to be referred to from other parts of the specification.

> This format will be referred to as an "OPTIMADE regex."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This format will be referred to as an "OPTIMADE regex".
```

Author: It turns out that this is a British vs American style difference. 
  
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quotation_marks_in_English#Order_of_punctuation

What do we use for the OPTIMADE specification?

Author: Ok, I'll merge this now since those that are present seem to be positive to the change.

However, we probably should more generally decide whether the specification uses British or American conventions and spelling.

Note that the American (illogical?) style usually still means placing the punctuation outside the quotations when it matters; from Wikipedia *"many American style guides explicitly permit periods and commas outside the quotation marks when the presence of the punctuation mark inside the quotation marks leads to ambiguity, such as when describing keyboard input"*

Depending on the context, a delimiter may be required to enclose the regex (e.g., double quotes or a slash character), and some outer-level escape rules may apply (e.g., to distinguish an enclosing double quote from one that is part of the regex).
Such delimiters and escape rules are not defined as part of the OPTIMADE regex format itself and have to be clarified when this format is referenced.

The format is a subset of the format described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__.
The format is closely inspired by the subset recommended in the JSON Schema standard, see `JSON Schema: A Media Type for Describing JSON Documents 2020-12, section 6.4 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#section-6.4>`__.
However, OPTIMADE has decided to restrict the subset further to better align it with the features available in common database backends and clarified that the escape character token can be used with the meaning defined by ECMA-262, section 21.2.1.

> Hence, an OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__.

Reviewer 4: To me this sounds as "OPTIMADE regex is **any** regular expression that adheres to ECMA-262, section 21.2.1" which is not true. Could this be paraphrased to dispel the possible ambiguity?

Author: I'm not sure I follow. What would be a regex that adheres to ECMA-262 sec 21.2.1 and follows the additional clauses in the consecutive sentences and which you do not consider an OPTIMADE regex?

(It also sounds as if you want to read "A is B" to mean "All B are A"? Is that the issue?)

Reviewer 4: > (It also sounds as if you want to read "A is B" to mean "All B are A"? Is that the issue?)

Yes. In other words, I read this sentence just as "A square is a polygon that has four vertices" which is true, but not invertible, although I find the construction of the sentence hinting equivalence from both sides.

Reviewer: Would it be more clear to rephrase it as:
```
Hence, an OPTIMADE regular expression MUST adhere to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1`.
```
or
```
Hence, all OPTIMADE regular expressions adhere to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1`.
```
?

Author: @merkys ... or is this what you are looking for? 
```suggestion
Hence, an OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__ with the additional restrictions described in the following.
```

Personally I don't see how this is needed. This type of phrasing "A is a B. A adheres to additional requirement C and D. Furthermore, restriction E also applies" seems quite common in this kind of formal text and is as far as I can see already present throughout the specification, see e.g.:

>   - **api\_version**: a string containing the full version of the API implementation.
>    The version number string MUST NOT be prefixed by, e.g., "v".
 >   Examples: :field-val:`1.0.0`, :field-val:`1.0.0-rc.2`.

I am however ok with merging the change above, if you feel strongly it clarifies the text.

Reviewer 4: I am OK with either your or @vaitkus suggestion. Also feel free to dismiss my comment. Just as an outsider wrt this PR (I missed the last meeting), the first time I read it the cited sentence threw me off the trail.

Reviewer 2: IMHO adding the clarification "with the additional restrictions described in the following" is helpful to maintain unambiguous text.

    [3,7,19, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]]
    [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]

OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format
----------------------------------

> This section defines a unicode string representation of regular expressions (regexes) to be referenced from other parts of the specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section defines a Unicode string representation of regular expressions (regexes) to be referenced from other parts of the specification.
```

The format will be referred to as an "OPTIMADE regex".

Regexes are commonly embedded in a contexts where they need to be enclosed by delimiters (e.g., double quotes or slash characters).
If this is the case, it is likely that some outer-level escape rules apply to allow the end delimiter to appear within the regex.
Such delimiters and escape rules are *not* included in the definition of the OPTIMADE regex format itself and needs to be clarified when this format is referenced.
The format defined in this section applies after such outer escape rules have been applied (e.g., when all occurences of ``\/`` have been translated into ``/`` for a format where an unescaped slash character is the end delimiter).

> Likewise, if an OPTIMADE regex is embedded in a serialized data format (e.g., JSON) this section documents the format of the unicode string resulting from unserialization of that format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, if an OPTIMADE regex is embedded in a serialized data format (e.g., JSON) this section documents the format of the Unicode string resulting from unserialization of that format.
```

- Simple character classes (e.g., ``[abc]``) and range character classes (e.g., ``[a-z]``) with the following constraints:

  * If the first character is ``]`` it designates a class that includes a literal ``]`` (and not an empty class).
    The ``]`` character cannot appear anywhere else in the class.
  * The character ``-`` designates ranges unless it appears at the start or end of the class.
  * A literal ``\`` is represented by an escaped backslash ``\\``.
  * Except for as specified above, all characters represent themselves literally (including syntax characters).
  * Each literal character can appear in the class at most once.

- Complemented character classes (e.g., ``[^abc]``, ``[^a-z]``).
- Simple quantifiers: ``+`` (one or more), ``*`` (zero or more), ``?`` (zero or one).
  (These can only appear directly after a character, group, or character class.)
- The beginning-of-input (``^``) and end-of-input (``$``) anchors.
- Simple grouping (``(...)``) and alternation (``|``).

Note that compared to the JSON Schema standard, lazy quantifiers (``+?``, ``*?``, ``??``) are NOT included, nor are range quantifiers (``{x}``, ``{x,y}``, ``{x,}``).

> Furthermore, there is no support for character class shorthands via the backslash character ``\`` and a letter, nor is there a way to represent a unicode character by its code point (i.e., one has to include it as the literal unicode character).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, there is no support for character class shorthands via the backslash character ``\`` and a letter, nor is there a way to represent a Unicode character by its code point (i.e., one has to include it as the literal Unicode character).
```

  * XML Schema regexes are compatible except that they are implicitly anchored: i.e., the beginning-of-input ``^`` and end-of-input ``$`` anchors must be removed, and missing anchors replaced by ``.*``.
  * SQLite supports regexes via libraries and thus can use a compatible format (e.g., PCRE2).

>   * Basic POSIX regular expressions differ from the defined format in that it requires groupings to be escaped, i.e. ``\(``, ``\)``.

Author: ```suggestion
  * Basic POSIX regular expressions differ from the defined format in that they require several of the metacharacters to be escaped, e.g. ``\(``, ``\)``.
```

Author: Fix minor grammar error

Hence, an OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__ with the additional restrictions described in the following.
The regex is interpreted according to the processing rules that apply for an expression where only the Unicode variable is set to true of all variables set by the RegExp internal slot described by `ECMA-262, section 21.2.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-notation>`__.
Furthermore, it can only use the following tokens and features (this list is partially quoted from the JSON Schema standard):

- Individual Unicode characters, as defined by the `JSON specification <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#RFC8259>`__.
- A literal escape of one of the syntax characters, i.e., the escape character (``\``) followed by one of the following characters ``^ $ \ . * + ? ( ) [ ] { } |`` to represent that literal character.
- Simple character classes (e.g., ``[abc]``) and range character classes (e.g., ``[a-z]``) with the following constraints:

>   * The class has to be ordered so that it does not start with the character ``[``.

Author: ```suggestion
```

    [3,7,19, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]]
    [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]

OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format
----------------------------------
This section defines a Unicode string representation of regular expressions (regexes) to be referenced from other parts of the specification.

> The format will be referred to as an "OPTIMADE regex."

Author: ```suggestion
The format will be referred to as an "OPTIMADE regex".
```

  (This rule prevents expressions with special meaning in some regex flavors, e.g., ``+?`` and ``(?`` ).)
- The beginning-of-input (``^``) and end-of-input (``$``) anchors.
- Simple grouping (``(...)``) and alternation (``|``).

Note that compared to the JSON Schema standard, lazy quantifiers (``+?``, ``*?``, ``??``) are *not* included, nor are range quantifiers (``{x}``, ``{x,y}``, ``{x,}``).
Furthermore, there is no support for escapes designating shorthand character classes as ``\`` and a letter or number, nor is there any way to represent a Unicode character by specifying a code point as a number, only via the Unicode character itself.
(However, the regex can be embedded in a context that defines such escapes, e.g., in serialized JSON a string containing the character ``\u`` followed by four hexadecimal digits is deserialized into the corresponding Unicode character.)

An OPTIMADE regex matches the string at any position unless it contains a leading beginning-of-input (``^``) or trailing end-of-input (``$``) anchor listed above, i.e., the anchors are not implicitly assumed.
For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".

> Regexes that utilize tokes and features documented by ECMA-262 beyond the designated subset are allowed to have an undefined behavior, i.e., they MAY match or not match *any* string or MAY produce an error.
> Implementations that do not produce errors in this situation are RECOMMENDED to generate warnings if possible.

Author: ```suggestion
Regexes that utilize tokes and features beyond the designated subset are allowed to have an undefined behavior, i.e., they MAY match or not match *any* string or MAY produce an error.
Implementations that do not produce errors in this situation are RECOMMENDED to generate warnings if possible.
```

  * SQLite supports regexes via libraries and thus can use a compatible format (e.g., PCRE2).
  * XML Schema appears to use a compatible regex format, except it is implicitly anchored: i.e., the beginning-of-input ``^`` and end-of-input ``$`` anchors must be removed, and missing anchors replaced by ``.*``.

>   * POSIX Extended regexes (and their extended GNU implementations) are incompatible because ``\`` is not a special character in character classes. POSIX Basic regexes also have further differences, e.g., the meaning of some escaped syntax characters is reversed.

Author: ```suggestion
  * POSIX Extended regexes (and their extended GNU implementations) are incompatible because ``\`` is not a special character in character classes. 
     POSIX Basic regexes also have further differences, e.g., the meaning of some escaped syntax characters is reversed.
```

  (This rule prevents expressions with special meaning in some regex flavors, e.g., ``+?`` and ``(?`` ).)
- The beginning-of-input (``^``) and end-of-input (``$``) anchors.
- Simple grouping (``(...)``) and alternation (``|``).

Note that compared to the JSON Schema standard, lazy quantifiers (``+?``, ``*?``, ``??``) are *not* included, nor are range quantifiers (``{x}``, ``{x,y}``, ``{x,}``).
Furthermore, there is no support for escapes designating shorthand character classes as ``\`` and a letter or number, nor is there any way to represent a Unicode character by specifying a code point as a number, only via the Unicode character itself.
(However, the regex can be embedded in a context that defines such escapes, e.g., in serialized JSON a string containing the character ``\u`` followed by four hexadecimal digits is deserialized into the corresponding Unicode character.)

An OPTIMADE regex matches the string at any position unless it contains a leading beginning-of-input (``^``) or trailing end-of-input (``$``) anchor listed above, i.e., the anchors are not implicitly assumed.
For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".

> Regexes that utilize tokes and features beyond the designated subset are allowed to have an undefined behavior, i.e., they MAY match or not match *any* string or MAY produce an error.

Reviewer 2: "tokens"?

- The beginning-of-input (``^``) and end-of-input (``$``) anchors.
- Simple grouping (``(...)``) and alternation (``|``).

Note that lazy quantifiers (``+?``, ``*?``, ``??``) are *not* included, nor are range quantifiers (``{x}``, ``{x,y}``, ``{x,}``).
Furthermore, there is no support for escapes designating shorthand character classes as ``\`` and a letter or number, nor is there any way to represent a Unicode character by specifying a code point as a number, only via the Unicode character itself.
(However, the regex can be embedded in a context that defines such escapes, e.g., in serialized JSON a string containing the character ``\u`` followed by four hexadecimal digits is deserialized into the corresponding Unicode character.)

An OPTIMADE regex matches the string at any position unless it contains a leading beginning-of-input (``^``) or trailing end-of-input (``$``) anchor listed above, i.e., the anchors are not implicitly assumed.
For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".

Regexes that utilize tokens and features beyond the designated subset are allowed to have an undefined behavior, i.e., they MAY match or not match *any* string or MAY produce an error.

> Implementations that do not produce errors in this situation are RECOMMENDED to generate warnings if possible.
>   Compatibility notes:

Author: ```suggestion
Implementations that do not produce errors in this situation are RECOMMENDED to generate warnings if possible.

  Compatibility notes:
```

The format defined in this section applies after such outer escape rules have been applied (e.g., when all occurrences of ``\/`` have been translated into ``/`` for a format where an unescaped slash character is the end delimiter).
Likewise, if an OPTIMADE regex is embedded in a serialized data format (e.g., JSON), this section documents the format of the Unicode string resulting from the deserialization of that format.

An OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__ with additional restrictions described below which define a subset of the ECMA-262 format chosen to match features commonly available in different database backends.
The regex is interpreted according to the ECMA-262 processing rules that apply for an expression where only the Unicode variable is set to true of all variables set by the RegExp internal slot described by `ECMA-262, section 21.2.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-notation>`__.

The subset includes only the following tokens and features:

> - Individual Unicode characters matching themselves, as defined by the `JSON specification <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#RFC8259>`__.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Individual Unicode characters matching themselves, as defined by the `JSON specification <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259>`__.
```

Reviewer 3: or

```suggestion
- Individual Unicode characters matching themselves, as defined by the JSON specification (:RFC:`8259`).
```

- The ``.`` character to match any one Unicode character except the line break characters LINE FEED (LF) (U+000A), CARRAGE RETURN (U+000D), LINE SEPARATOR (U+2028), PARAGRAPH SEPARATOR (U+2029) (see `ECMA-262 section 2.2.2.7 <https://262.ecma-international.org/14.0/?_gl=1*yqtzjq*_ga*MjEzNTE2ODEyNi4xNzA0NTQ1NTk5*_ga_TDCK4DWEPP*MTcwNzk5ODA1My43LjEuMTcwNzk5OTYxNC4wLjAuMA..#sec-compileatom>`__).
- A literal escape of `one of the characters defined as syntax characters in the ECMA-262 standard <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#prod-SyntaxCharacter>`__, i.e., the escape character (``\``) followed by one of the following characters ``^ $ \ . * + ? ( ) [ ] { } |`` to represent that literal character.
  No other characters can be escaped.
  (This rule prevents other escapes that are interpreted differently depending on regex flavor.)

> - Simple character classes (e.g., ``[abc]``), complemented character classes (e.g. [^abc]) and their ranged versions (e.g., ``[a-z]``, ``[^a-z]``) with the following constraints:

Author: ```suggestion
- Simple character classes (e.g., ``[abc]``), complemented character classes (e.g. [^abc]), and their ranged versions (e.g., ``[a-z]``, ``[^a-z]``) with the following constraints:
```

> - Simple character classes (e.g., ``[abc]``), complemented character classes (e.g. [^abc]), and their ranged versions (e.g., ``[a-z]``, ``[^a-z]``) with the following constraints:

Author: ```suggestion
- Simple character classes (e.g., ``[abc]``), complemented character classes (e.g. ``[^abc]``), and their ranged versions (e.g., ``[a-z]``, ``[^a-z]``) with the following constraints:
```

  * The character ``-`` designates ranges, unless it is the first or last character of the class in which case it represents a literal ``-`` character.
  * If the first character is ``^`` then the expression matches all characters *except* the ones specified by the class as defined by the characters that follows.
  * The characters ``\ [ ]`` can only appear escaped with a preceding backslash, e.g. ``\\`` designates that the class includes a literal ``\`` character.
    The other syntax characters may appear either escaped or unescaped to designate that the class includes them.
    (This rule prevents other escapes inside classes that are not the same across regex flavors and expressions that, in some flavors, are interpreted as nested classes.)
  * Except as specified above, all characters represent themselves literally (including syntax characters).
  * Characters that represent themselves literally can only appear at most once.

>     (This rule prevents various kinds of extended character class syntax that differs between regex formats that assigns special meaning to duplicated characters, e.g., POSIX character classes, e.g., ``[:alpha:]``, equivalence classes, e.g., ``[=a=]``, set constructs, e.g. ``[A--B]``, ``[A&&B]``, etc.).

Author: ```suggestion
    (This rule prevents various kinds of extended character class syntax that differs between regex formats that assigns special meaning to duplicated characters such as POSIX character classes, e.g., ``[:alpha:]``, equivalence classes, e.g., ``[=a=]``, set constructs, e.g. ``[A--B]``, ``[A&&B]``, etc.).
```

- Simple quantifiers: ``+`` (one or more), ``*`` (zero or more), ``?`` (zero or one) that appear directly after a character, group, or character class.
  (This rule prevents expressions with special meaning in some regex flavors, e.g., ``+?`` and ``(?...)``.)
- The beginning-of-input (``^``) and end-of-input (``$``) anchors.
- Simple grouping (``(...)``) and alternation (``|``).

> Note that compared to the JSON Schema standard, lazy quantifiers (``+?``, ``*?``, ``??``) are *not* included, nor are range quantifiers (``{x}``, ``{x,y}``, ``{x,}``).
> Furthermore, there is no support for escapes designating shorthand character classes as ``\`` and a letter or number, nor is there any way to represent a Unicode character by specifying a code point as a number, only via the Unicode character itself.
> (However, the regex can be embedded in a context that defines such escapes, e.g., in serialized JSON a string containing the character ``\u`` followed by four hexadecimal digits is deserialized into the corresponding Unicode character.)
> 
> An OPTIMADE regex matches the string at any position unless it contains a leading beginning-of-input (``^``) or trailing end-of-input (``$``) anchor listed above, i.e., the anchors are not implicitly assumed.
> For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".
> 
> Regexes that utilize tokens and features beyond the designated subset are allowed to have an undefined behavior, i.e., they MAY match or not match *any* string or MAY produce an error.
> Implementations that do not produce errors in this situation are RECOMMENDED to generate warnings if possible.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Note that lazy quantifiers (``+?``, ``*?``, ``??``) are *not* included, nor are range quantifiers (``{x}``, ``{x,y}``, ``{x,}``).
Furthermore, there is no support for escapes designating shorthand character classes as ``\`` and a letter or number, nor is there any way to represent a Unicode character by specifying a code point as a number, only via the Unicode character itself.
(However, the regex can be embedded in a context that defines such escapes, e.g., in serialized JSON a string containing the character ``\u`` followed by four hexadecimal digits is deserialized into the corresponding Unicode character.)

An OPTIMADE regex matches the string at any position unless it contains a leading beginning-of-input (``^``) or trailing end-of-input (``$``) anchor listed above, i.e., the anchors are not implicitly assumed.
For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".

Regexes that utilize tokens and features beyond the designated subset are allowed to have an undefined behavior, i.e., they MAY match or not match *any* string or MAY produce an error.
Implementations that do not produce errors in this situation are RECOMMENDED to generate warnings if possible.
```

   ["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]

OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format
----------------------------------
This section defines a Unicode string representation of regular expressions (regexes) to be referenced from other parts of the specification.
The format will be referred to as an "OPTIMADE regex".

Regexes are commonly embedded in a context where they need to be enclosed by delimiters (e.g., double quotes or slash characters).
If this is the case, some outer-level escape rules likely apply to allow the end delimiter to appear within the regex.
Such delimiters and escape rules are *not* included in the definition of the OPTIMADE regex format itself and need to be clarified when this format is referenced.
The format defined in this section applies after such outer escape rules have been applied (e.g., when all occurrences of ``\/`` have been translated into ``/`` for a format where an unescaped slash character is the end delimiter).
Likewise, if an OPTIMADE regex is embedded in a serialized data format (e.g., JSON), this section documents the format of the Unicode string resulting from the deserialization of that format.

> The format is a subset of the format described in `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__.
> The restrictions are chosen to match features commonly available in database backends.
> The subset is compatible with the `PCRE2 regex engine <https://www.pcre.org/current/doc/html/>`__ when it is configured accordingly.
> The subset is also intended to be compatible with, but even further restricted than, the subset recommended in the JSON Schema standard, see `JSON Schema: A Media Type for Describing JSON Documents 2020-12, section 6.4 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#section-6.4>`__.
> The compatibility with the JSON Schema standard is expressed as "intended" since there is some room for interpretation of the precise features included in the subset of regex features recommended in that standard.
> 
> Hence, an OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__ with the additional restrictions described in the following.
> The regex is interpreted according to the processing rules that apply for an expression where only the Unicode variable is set to true of all variables set by the RegExp internal slot described by `ECMA-262, section 21.2.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-notation>`__.
> Furthermore, it can only use the following tokens and features (this list is partially quoted from the JSON Schema standard):

Author: ```suggestion
An OPTIMADE regex is a regular expression that adheres to `ECMA-262, section 21.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-patterns>`__ with additional restrictions described below which define a subset of the ECMA-262 format chosen to match features commonly available in different database backends.
The regex is interpreted according to the ECMA-262 processing rules that apply for an expression where only the Unicode variable is set to true of all variables set by the RegExp internal slot described by `ECMA-262, section 21.2.2.1 <https://262.ecma-international.org/11.0/#sec-notation>`__.

The subset includes only the following tokens and features:
```

An OPTIMADE regex matches the string at any position unless it contains a leading beginning-of-input (``^``) or trailing end-of-input (``$``) anchor listed above, i.e., the anchors are not implicitly assumed.
For example, the OPTIMADE regex "es" matches "expression".

Regexes that utilize tokens and features beyond the designated subset are allowed to have an undefined behavior, i.e., they MAY match or not match *any* string or MAY produce an error.
Implementations that do not produce errors in this situation are RECOMMENDED to generate warnings if possible.

  Compatibility notes:

  The definition tolerates (with undefined behavior) regexes that use tokens and features beyond the defined subset.
  Hence, a regex can be directly handed over to a backend implementation compatible with the subset without needing validation or translation.
  Additional consideration of how the ``.`` character operates in relation to line breaks may be required for multiline text.
  If the regex is applied to strings containing only the LINE FEED (U+000A) character and none of the other Unicode line break characters, most regex backend implementations are compatible with the defined behavior.

>   If the regex is applied to string data containing arbitrary combinations of line break characters and the right behavior cannot be achieved via environmental settings and regex options, implementations can consider a translation step where other line break characters are translated into LINE FEED in the text operated on.

Author: ```suggestion
  If the regex is applied to string data containing arbitrary combinations of Unicode line break characters and the right behavior cannot be achieved via environmental settings and regex options, implementations can consider a translation step where other line break characters are translated into LINE FEED in the text operated on.
```

>   Compatibility with different regex implementations may change depending on the environment, language versions, and options and has to be verified by implementations.

Author: ```suggestion
  Compatibility with different regex implementations may change depending on the environment, implementation programming language versions, and options and has to be verified by implementations.
```

>   Compatibility notes:
> 
>   The definition tolerates (with undefined behavior) regexes that use tokens and features beyond the defined subset.
>   Hence, a regex can be directly handed over to a backend implementation compatible with the subset without needing validation or translation.
>   Additional consideration of how the ``.`` character operates in relation to line breaks may be required for multiline text.
>   If the regex is applied to strings containing only the LINE FEED (U+000A) character and none of the other Unicode line break characters, most regex backend implementations are compatible with the defined behavior.
>   If the regex is applied to string data containing arbitrary combinations of Unicode line break characters and the right behavior cannot be achieved via environmental settings and regex options, implementations can consider a translation step where other line break characters are translated into LINE FEED in the text operated on.
> 
>   Compatibility with different regex implementations may change depending on the environment, implementation programming language versions, and options and has to be verified by implementations.
>   However, as a general guide, we have used third-party sources, e.g., the `Regular Expression Engine Comparison Chart <https://gist.github.com/CMCDragonkai/6c933f4a7d713ef712145c5eb94a1816>`__ to collect the following information for compatibility when operating on text using LINE FEED as the line break character:
> 
>   * `ECMAScript (also known as javascript) <https://262.ecma-international.org/>`__ and version 1 and 2 of `PCRE <https://www.pcre.org/>`__ are meant to be compatible by design.
> 
>   * The following regex formats appear generally compatible when operating in Unicode mode: `Perl <https://perldoc.perl.org/perlre>`__, `Python <https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html>`__, `Ruby <https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/Regexp.html>`__, `Rust <https://docs.rs/regex/latest/regex/>`__, `Java <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html>`__, `.NET <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/base-types/details-of-regular-expression-behavior>`__, `MySQL 8 <https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/regexp.html>`__, `MongoDB <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/query/regex/>`__, `Oracle <https://docs.oracle.com/cd/B13789_01/appdev.101/b10795/adfns_re.htm>`__, `IBM Db2 <https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/db2/11.5?topic=reference-regular-expressions>`__, `Elasticsearch <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/regexp-syntax.html>`__, `DuckDB <https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/functions/patternmatching.html#regular-expressions>`__ (which uses the `re2 <https://github.com/google/re2/wiki/Syntax>`__ library).
>   * SQLite supports regexes via libraries and thus can use a compatible format (e.g., PCRE2).
>   * XML Schema appears to use a compatible regex format, except it is implicitly anchored: i.e., the beginning-of-input ``^`` and end-of-input ``$`` anchors must be removed, and missing anchors replaced by ``.*``.
>   * POSIX Extended regexes (and their extended GNU implementations) are incompatible because ``\`` is not a special character in character classes.
>     POSIX Basic regexes also have further differences, e.g., the meaning of some escaped syntax characters is reversed.

Author: ```suggestion
  Compatibility notes:

  * The subset is intended to be compatible with, but even further restricted than, the subset recommended in the JSON Schema standard, see `JSON Schema: A Media Type for Describing JSON Documents 2020-12, section 6.4 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#section-6.4>`__.
    The compatibility with the JSON Schema standard is expressed here as "intended" since there is some room for interpretation of the precise features included in the recommendation given in that standard.

  * The definition tolerates (with undefined behavior) regexes that use tokens and features beyond the defined subset.
    Hence, a regex can be directly handed over to a backend implementation compatible with the subset without needing validation or translation.
    
  * Additional consideration of how the ``.`` character operates in relation to line breaks may be required for multiline text.
    If the regex is applied to strings containing only the LINE FEED (U+000A) character and none of the other Unicode line break characters, most regex backend implementations are compatible with the defined behavior.
    If the regex is applied to string data containing arbitrary combinations of Unicode line break characters and the right behavior cannot be achieved via environmental settings and regex options, implementations can consider a translation step where other line break characters are translated into LINE FEED in the text operated on.

  * Compatibility with different regex implementations may change depending on the environment, implementation programming language versions, and options and has to be verified by implementations.
    However, as a general guide, we have used third-party sources, e.g., the `Regular Expression Engine Comparison Chart <https://gist.github.com/CMCDragonkai/6c933f4a7d713ef712145c5eb94a1816>`__ to collect the following information for compatibility when operating on text using LINE FEED as the line break character:

      * `ECMAScript (also known as javascript) <https://262.ecma-international.org/>`__ and version 1 and 2 of `PCRE <https://www.pcre.org/>`__ are meant to be compatible by design when used with appropriate options.

      * The following regex formats appear generally compatible when operating in Unicode mode: `Perl <https://perldoc.perl.org/perlre>`__, `Python <https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html>`__, `Ruby <https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/Regexp.html>`__, `Rust <https://docs.rs/regex/latest/regex/>`__, `Java <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html>`__, `.NET <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/base-types/details-of-regular-expression-behavior>`__, `MySQL 8 <https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/regexp.html>`__, `MongoDB <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/query/regex/>`__, `Oracle <https://docs.oracle.com/cd/B13789_01/appdev.101/b10795/adfns_re.htm>`__, `IBM Db2 <https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/db2/11.5?topic=reference-regular-expressions>`__, `Elasticsearch <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/regexp-syntax.html>`__, `DuckDB <https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/functions/patternmatching.html#regular-expressions>`__ (which uses the `re2 <https://github.com/google/re2/wiki/Syntax>`__ library).
      * SQLite supports regexes via libraries and thus can use a compatible format (e.g., PCRE2).
      * XML Schema appears to use a compatible regex format, except it is implicitly anchored: i.e., the beginning-of-input ``^`` and end-of-input ``$`` anchors must be removed, and missing anchors replaced by ``.*``.
      * POSIX Extended regexes (and their extended GNU implementations) are incompatible because ``\`` is not a special character in character classes.
        POSIX Basic regexes also have further differences, e.g., the meaning of some escaped syntax characters is reversed.
```
